JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Justice under fire.
On the six-month anniversary
of his taking office, President
Trump goes public with his
regret over his choice for
attorney general, while blasting
the FBI and the special counsel
investigating Russia.
Then: stepping back in Syria.
President Trump ends a covert
operation arming rebel fighters,
a move that eases pressure
on both Presidents
Assad and Putin.
Plus: Making Sense of fears
over the rise of artificial
intelligence, and how to curb
the future power of computers.
NICK BOSTROM, Oxford University:
How could you then ensure
that you could control what
those machines do, that they
were beneficial, that they were
aligned with human intentions?
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President
Trump sounding off again.
This time, as he observes
the first half-year
mark of his presidency,
he's vented some very
public criticism of his attorney
general and of other top
Justice Department officials,
past and present.
John Yang begins our coverage.
JEFF SESSIONS, U.S. Attorney
General: Good morning.
JOHN YANG: Attorney General
Jeff Sessions made it clear
today he's not going anywhere
for now.
JEFF SESSIONS: We love this job.
We love this department.
And I plan to continue to do so,
as long as that is appropriate.
JOHN YANG: That came after
President Trump's sharp rebuke
of Sessions in a New York Times
interview for disqualifying
himself from the
Russia investigation.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: How do you take
a job, and then recuse yourself?
If he would have recused
himself before the job, I would
have said, thanks, Jeff, but
I can't -- you know, I'm
not going to take you.
It's extremely unfair,
and that's a mild
word, to the president.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Trump also said
Sessions gave some bad answers
in his Senate confirmation
hearing when he failed
to disclose meetings with
the Russian ambassador.
While the White House said
the president still has
confidence in Sessions,
Mr. Trump's comments
mark a public break from one
of his earliest supporters.
It also suggests that
Mr. Trump's anger with
Sessions is still fresh
more than four months
after the attorney
general recused himself.
In the 50-minute interview, Mr.
Trump leveled a new allegation
about why fired FBI Director
James Comey told him
about the uncorroborated
contents of a salacious
dossier before Inauguration
Day: "In my opinion, he
shared it so that I would
think he had it out there."
He was asked, "As leverage?"
"Yes, I think so,
in retrospect."
The president also
appeared to warn special
counsel Robert Mueller to
limit his investigation.
QUESTION: Mueller was looking
at your finances, your family's
finances unrelated to Russia.
Is that a red line?
QUESTION: Well, that be a breach
of what his actual charge is?
DONALD TRUMP: I would say yes.
I would say yes.
JOHN YANG: Could Mueller's
investigation go there?
Greg Farrell is a Bloomberg
News investigative reporter.
GREG FARRELL, Bloomberg News:
That's what this is all about.
They have to look into Trump's
own finances and see if there's
been any unusual benefit
beyond the purchase of
apartments, if there's
anything unusual about all
the business transactions
that have taken place
over many years between
Russian nationals and him.
JOHN YANG: Although the White
House said the president
doesn't intend to fire Mueller,
his comments raised red flags
for some Senate Judiciary
Committee Democrats.
SEN.
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL (D),
Connecticut: What we're watching
is an obstruction of justice
case unfolding in real
time right before our
eyes, the president of
the United States trying
to set limits on a
legitimate investigation.
SEN.
AMY KLOBUCHAR (D), Minnesota:
Mueller has the right to
investigate this, and he was
given that authority by
the Justice Department,
and he reports to the
Justice Department and
not to the president
of the United States.
JOHN YANG: Committee
Chairman Chuck Grassley
said he wasn't worried.
SEN.
CHARLES GRASSLEY (R), Iowa:
As I know Mueller or 13 years
or how many years he was head
of the FBI, he's
going to do his job.
And that's all that matters.
JOHN YANG: Grassley said Donald
Trump Jr. and former Trump
campaign chairman Paul Manafort
have not yet responded to his
request that they testify next
week and that he will subpoena
them if necessary.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm John Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will explore
some of the implications of
the president's comments after
the news summary.
In the day's other news:
Russia's official RIA
news agency reported
the U.S. and Russia
are talking about creating a
cyber-security working group.
President Trump had raised a
similar idea during the G20
summit, but backed off under
heavy criticism.
This latest report comes amid
multiple U.S. investigations
of Russian meddling in the
2016 election.
The Congressional Budget Office
says that a revised Senate
Republican health care bill
leaves as many people uninsured
as a previous version.
The CBO reported today
that, under the bill,
another 22 million Americans
would lose coverage
by 2026.
The measure would also reduce
federal deficits by $420
billion over the coming decade.
So far, GOP leaders still lack
the votes to debate the bill.
The health of Senator
John McCain dominated this
day at the U.S. Capitol.
The Arizona Republican has been
diagnosed with brain cancer,
and doctors removed a tumor,
but McCain may need
additional treatment.
The news stunned lawmakers from
both parties, who said they're
hoping for the best for their
longtime colleague.
SEN.
PATRICK LEAHY (D), Vermont:
He's a good friend.
We agree and we disagree.
But he's one of the oldest
-- he keeps his word.
And I know we will be praying
for him at mass this weekend.
SEN.
LINDSEY GRAHAM (R), South
Carolina: He may outlive us all.
I don't know what -- God only
knows how this thing ends.
I just ask God for one thing,
that he has a voice and he can
use it as long as possible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: McCain is 80,
having survived seven years in
a North Vietnamese prison during
the Vietnam War.
He was a Republican presidential
nominee in 2008 and is
serving his sixth term in the
Senate.
Today, he tweeted: "I
greatly appreciate the
outpouring of support.
Unfortunately, for my sparring
partners in Congress, I will
be back soon, so stand by."
For the first time in the global
AIDS epidemic, more than half
of all those infected with
HIV are on drugs
to treat the virus.
A United Nations report today
also finds that overall AIDS
deaths have fallen to about half
the level of 2005.
The disease has killed
35 million people over
the past four decades.
O.J. Simpson was granted
parole in Nevada today, after
nearly nine years in prison,
and could be freed in October.
The one-time pro football star
had been jailed for an armed
robbery in 2007 involving his
own sports mementos.
Today, in a live-streamed
hearing, Simpson, now 70 years
old, pleaded his case to the
state parole board.
O.J.
SIMPSON, Inmate: I
have done my time.
You know, I have done it
as well and as respectfully
as I think anybody can.
I think if you talk to the
wardens there, they will tell
you I have been -- I gave them
my word.
I believe in the jury system.
I have honored their verdict.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Simpson's
defenders said that his 33-year
sentence was overly harsh, and
that he was really being
punished for the murders of his
ex-wife and her friend in 1994.
He was acquitted of
those killings in 1995.
The U.S. Senate today confirmed
a federal appeals judge,
despite a series of blog posts
that Democrats condemned.
Kentucky lawyer John
Bush was approved 51-47.
In one online posting, under a
pseudonym, he called abortion
and slavery -- quote -- "the
two greatest tragedies
in our country."
He also linked to articles on a
far-right conspiracy Web site.
ExxonMobil was fined $2 million
today for violating U.S.
sanctions on Russia in 2014.
The oil giant said that it will
challenge the fine in court.
The U.S. Treasury Department
says the company showed reckless
disregard for sanctions by
signing deals with
the head of Russia's
state-owned oil company.
At the time, Secretary
of State Rex Tillerson
was ExxonMobil's CEO.
And on Wall Street, the
Dow Jones industrial
average lost about 29
points to close at 21611.
The Nasdaq rose about five, and
the S&P 500 slipped a fraction.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a deeper look at President
Trump's frustration with
his own attorney general; White
House plans to scrap a program
to arm Syrian rebels; how
the Obama administration tried
to safeguard state election
systems against Russian hacking;
and much more.
Back to President Trump's
comments to The New
York Times yesterday.
The broadsides aimed at top
officials from the Justice
Department raise questions about
the president's
relationship with Attorney
General Jeff Sessions.
We are joined by
Walter Dellinger.
He served in the Clinton
administration as
assistant attorney general
and acting solicitor
general.
He's now in private practice.
And former U.S. Ambassador
Douglas Kmiec, he
served as legal counsel
to Presidents Ronald
Reagan and George H.W. Bush.
He is now a professor of
constitutional law at Pepperdine
University Law School.
And we welcome you both
back to the program.
Walter Dellinger, to you first.
How significant are the
president's criticisms of
top officials at Justice?
WALTER DELLINGER, Former Acting
Solicitor General: Well, I
think they're unprecedented
in their inappropriateness.
A president shouldn't
be commenting on any
particular criminal
investigation, especially
he should not be commenting one
that involves people that are
close to him, potential family
members.
And yet here the president
said that the attorney
general shouldn't have
recused himself and
shouldn't have been appointed
unless he had sort of committed
himself not to recuse, even
though departmental
rules would call for it.
He then criticized the
deputy attorney general
for naming a special
counsel, which was clearly
appropriate.
And, finally, he made it clear
that he thought that the special
counsel shouldn't inquire
into any financial dealings
that are outside of the scope
of the Russian campaign.
All of those seem to be
inappropriate for a president,
unprecedented, and something
that certainly would send
a chill through the entire
Department of Justice.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Douglas Kmiec,
inappropriate and likely to send
a chill through the department?
DOUGLAS KMIEC, Pepperdine
University Law School: I think
everything Walter said is true.
We know of two things as a
result of that interview, one,
that he has a very intelligent
and beautiful granddaughter
who he's very proud of.
And that, I think, will
humanize the president for
people who read his interview.
But we are very troubled by the
nature of how he understands
his role as president and
his ability to intercede into
particular investigations.
You know, Judy, I think he
comes from the business world,
where his perception is where
lawyers are hired because
they're smart and clever and
they can get the best price on
property and the best
title arrangements and
the best closing date,
and all these things
are subject to negotiation.
And what he doesn't realize --
and it becomes plain at every
turn -- is that the Constitution
is designed to separate power,
to specify limits, to make sure
that nobody has the ability
to give favoritism
to their friends.
And this is just something
he just doesn't grasp.
Instead, he has a very
transactional view of the law,
and it's not the view that the
Department of Justice has
to defend, as a matter
of the Constitution.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Walter
Dellinger, given if that's his
understanding of the role of
the Justice Department,
what are the consequences
for the department in
terms of its ability
to do its job?
WALTER DELLINGER: Well, I think,
outside the area of the Russia
investigation, the department
will go forward.
I think the president's
reputation has suffered
enough that his criticism
of Attorney General
Sessions is likely only to
enhance the attorney general's
standing within the department.
You know, I think that, in
terms of this particular
investigation, it will proceed.
You know, Robert Mueller, we
have to remember, is like James
Comey, a lifelong Republican,
12 years as head of the FBI
under two presidents of two
different political parties.
Robert Mueller is known to
law enforcement throughout the
United States and held in the
highest possible regard, so
that -- and I certainly agree
with everything Doug Kmiec
said.
If the president were to make
a move to try to break through
the department and dismiss
Robert Mueller, I think the
organized bar would find it
incumbent upon itself to take
whatever actions they
could in response to that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Doug Kmiec,
at this point, the president
is saying he's not going to
do that.
But he also seemed to send a
shot across the bow in saying
that, if it turns out that Mr.
Mueller is looking into his
own financial dealings, any
financial dealings with Russia,
which may be the case, that he
would give it another thought.
So, what does that mean
for Mr. Mueller and his
ability to go forward?
DOUGLAS KMIEC: Well, I don't
think Mr. Mueller will be
intimidated whatsoever.
As Walter said, he's a straight
shooter, and he is being very
careful and very quiet as
he gathers his
information, as he should.
The concern I have is that
the president, if he thinks
that it's only a very narrow
question of whether there was
a contact with Russia, that
is just simply not plausible,
because the real concern is
that the president somehow has
gotten himself into a difficult
position with a foreign country,
where a foreign country has
some information, perhaps with
this disreputable memo that
talks about terrible practices
that the president allegedly was
involved in, perhaps
something else.
To the extent that there is some
undue influence of a foreign
nation of his decision-making,
it strikes every aspect
of his job, foreign policy
and domestic policy.
And that's just simply
not going to be accepted.
And so what is going to be
the answer if he objects?
I think the answer will be
a referral to the House of
Representatives for removal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For
removal of the president?
WALTER DELLINGER: The
president, if I could just...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Of the president?
WALTER DELLINGER: I think
Doug was saying a referral for
impeachment proceedings, yes.
But you know that every step
he's taking are further elements
of what might well be an
obstruction of justice
against the president.
The very idea that he
would be trying to direct
the special counsel not
to inquire into certain
areas involving the president's
own finances, even though the
president has a free speech
right to do that and can
exercise the power of
his presidency, if he
does so for a corrupt
motive, those can
certainly be elements of
an obstruction of justice.
DOUGLAS KMIEC: I think
that that is right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Go ahead.
DOUGLAS KMIEC: The one thing
we might worry about that the
president might have helped
himself, in an ironic sort of
way, in the interview, is how
profoundly he misunderstands
the law.
In an obstruction of justice
prosecution, an espionage
prosecution, all these things
in Title 18 require bad intent
and specific bad intent.
And President Trump's knowledge
of how the law works is so
rudimentary and so different
than our history, where
Harry Truman was told
he couldn't seize the
steel mills, where Ronald
Reagan was told he couldn't have
a line-item veto unless there
was a constitutional amendment,
where one administration after
another said to the president
of the United States, yes,
you are our chief executive, but
that means you must take care
that the laws are faithfully
executed, not that you take
care that your objectives are
accomplished irregardless of
the law.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I just want
to come back to both of you
again, with less than a minute,
and that is to clarify that
you believe that the job of the
attorney general, the deputy
attorney general, these other
individuals the president is
criticizing, that they can
do their jobs as usual,
that their authority
is not undermined after
these criticisms from
the president, Walter Dellinger?
WALTER DELLINGER: You know,
Judy, I don't, because I don't
think people take criticisms
by Donald Trump the way
they would criticism
with any other president.
I don't think that affects the
attorney general's standing
within the department.
DOUGLAS KMIEC: I agree.
I also think that, as
Walter said, Jeff Sessions,
to the extent that he's
putting his nose down
to the grindstone and getting
down to work and accomplishing
the other -- the vast number
of other tasks that
the department handles,
will be admired by those
people in the Justice
Department, as it should.
I think Jeff Sessions
made a very important...
(CROSSTALK)
WALTER DELLINGER: You know,
I think he shouldn't...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Go ahead.
DOUGLAS KMIEC: Go ahead, Walter.
WALTER DELLINGER: I was
saying, Doug, I think
he shouldn't resign.
I think he shouldn't resign,
because that's exactly what
the president wants him to do,
so he can install some
non-recused loyalist
in the department.
DOUGLAS KMIEC: Exactly right.
And Jeff Sessions, however
awkward it would be to continue
his service, is doing a service
to maintain the institution
of the Department of Justice.
And that is what's important.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Douglas
Kmiec, Walter Dellinger,
we thank you both.
A CIA program to aid Syrian
rebels fighting the regime of
Bashar al-Assad will soon be
ended by the Trump
administration.
Hari Sreenivasan has that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It was a
covert program, started in
2013 under President Obama, in
the hopes of forcing
Assad from power.
The news that President Trump
would end the operation was
first reported by The Washington
Post yesterday.
Joining me now for what impact
this will have on the conflict
in Syria is Faysal Itani,
a senior fellow at
the Atlantic Council.
First, let's talk about
what this means, what the
strategy is behind this move.
FAYSAL ITANI, Atlantic Council's
Rafik Hariri Center for the
Middle East: Well, this is
something -- this is a campaign,
a strategy that's actually
been rolled back for a long
time.
Initially, it started as --
under the Obama administration
as a tool to put pressure on
the Assad regime,
military pressure, to
get them to negotiate.
That didn't work.
When the Russians came into
Syria in 2015, the stakes
became really too high and the
risks became too high for
the administration to keep on
pushing with a proxy war program
like this.
So, this is basically a rollback
of that, and an indication
that we have entered a whole
different phase of the war.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We have
seen the Trump administration
repeatedly say, our
focus is on defeating
ISIS.
Does this move help in
the fight against ISIS?
FAYSAL ITANI: Not so much.
It doesn't have any
immediate benefit on
the fight against ISIS.
But I think what the president
was saying and thinking was
that we don't want anything
to potentially distract or
sort of siphon resources away
from the fight against ISIS,
so why are we doing this thing?
Why do we have this program?
We're fighting Assad.
Why should we be fighting Assad?
So, I think it's really a
question just eliminating
other agendas and
keeping one agenda alone.
And I do think that
some of these people who
have been on the U.S.
payroll for a long time,
and they're armed, they will be
deployed against jihadi groups
in Southern Syria, not all of
them, but some of them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
rebels that are affected
by this particular
operation seem to be in
the area that is right
now holding tentatively
under a cease-fire, right?
FAYSAL ITANI: Yes, absolutely.
And I think it's no coincidence
that this cease-fire relies
on Russian goodwill and
Russian intention of actually
restraining the regime for
breaking that cease-fire.
And in return for that,
I think you see part
of the calculation is
that we're offering
this concession.
We're showing the Russians that
we are serious about no longer
escalating militarily against
the regime.
And this is a sign of our
goodwill and our commitment.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Has
the strategy of funding,
at least in terms of
arms, these rebel groups,
has that worked?
FAYSAL ITANI: No, because
it was never of a sufficient
scale or magnitude or quality
that would really present a
strategic threat to the regime,
sufficient military threat
to the regime.
The regime understood
that fairly well, when
we got slightly -- a
couple of years into
the conflict, really.
And the point is that it was
never meant to put so much
pressure on the regime that it
would collapse.
It was meant to sort
of put just enough that
it would bring Bashar
al-Assad to the negotiating
table.
And I think, obviously,
that wasn't going to
happen, and it didn't.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Does
this change that equation?
Is Bashar al-Assad happier
now that there is officially
a de-escalation, at least in
terms of support of arms against
the people that he's against?
FAYSAL ITANI: I think this is
definitely good news to him.
It's something, though, that
had been happening for a while.
But now that it's about
to become -- I think
this is why there is a
leak -- going to become
official U.S. policy, then, yes,
he certainly knows that he's
in the clear, insofar as there
is a U.S. intention to pose
a military threat to him.
And without the United States
backing one or more of these
groups in Syria, there really
isn't any way to pose a serious
threat to the regime, given
that Russia and Iran are
fighting on his side.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There's the
political dimension to it.
The Senate Armed Services
Committee, John McCain said,
even while he's recuperating
- - I want to read part of
his quote -- "If these reports
are true, the administration
is playing right into the
hands of Vladimir Putin.
Making any concession to Russia,
absent a broader strategy
for Syria, is irresponsible
and shortsighted."
FAYSAL ITANI: I think what
Senator McCain is really saying
is, he doesn't agree with
the policy of leaving Bashar
al-Assad alone, and focusing
only on ISIS, and letting the
Russians dictate the way
that that plays out in
terms of cease-fires.
If you decided that that's
the course, this is not
really a concession.
This is actually
what our strategy is.
It's only a concession if what
our intention is, is actually
to wrest some sort of other
concession out of the
regime or out of Russia.
And I don't think
that is the case.
I think we're really just kind
of hoping that the Russians
will deliver on the cease-fire
agreements.
And, well, let's
see if that happens.
I'm very skeptical,
but let's see.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Well,
what about the aggressions
that have happened on
the parts of the Assad
regime and the Russians, in
sometimes their indiscriminate
bombing of innocent civilians
and so forth?
If we decide to de-escalate
this, does this decrease
our voice at the table?
FAYSAL ITANI: Yes, I think
our voice at the table started
decreasing when we failed to
respond to chemical weapons
attacks on August 2013, failed
to respond to the Russian entry
and the subsequent escalation.
I think all the parties really
on the other side have already
sort of taken measure of
us and understood what our
commitments are and what they
aren't, and that we don't have
the stomach for a fight
against Bashar al-Assad
or even the stomach for
sort of stopping these
sort of atrocities that
you're talking about.
So, these will continue until
they're no longer needed.
And then you will see one
opposition area after the other
come under regime control.
And, definitely, yes,
there is nothing standing
in the way anymore in,
for example, Southern
Syria.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Faysal Itani, thanks so much.
FAYSAL ITANI: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We turn back
to the Russia investigations
and the issue at their core:
that government's meddling
in the 2016 U.S. election.
How Russian officials made
it happen is the focus of at
least three official probes in
Washington, but information
about what they did and didn't
do to our voting process and
to our confidence in
our election system has
come in fits and starts.
A new cover story for "TIME"
magazine takes a deep dive into
what we know now, connecting
the dots of how, why
and how far they went.
It's titled "Inside the
Secret Plan to Stop Vladimir
Putin's U.S. Election Plot."
And the author, "TIME"
magazine's Massimo Calabresi,
is here with me now.
Welcome to the program, Massimo.
So, what you have reported in
this issue of "TIME" is what
we don't know before, how far
the federal government had
gone last year to prevent
damage by the Russians.
MASSIMO CALABRESI, "TIME":
In the days leading up
to the election, the top
federal cyber-security
officials realized that,
for the efforts they
had taken throughout
the election, our voting
system was still vulnerable, not
to interference with the actual
vote count, but to undermining
the credibility of the vote,
the integrity of the vote,
which is, of course, the purpose
of voting to begin with,
to reach a consensus
that the democratic
will of the people has
been expressed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what
was it that the government
was prepared to do?
MASSIMO CALABRESI: Well, they
enumerated in this 15-page
plan some extraordinary steps.
They stipulated at the beginning
that, under most circumstances,
the federal government
would defer to the states
in a cyber-incident,
but in a particularly
bad one, for example,
one that halted voting at a
voting place, they would go
so far as to send armed law
enforcement, federal
law enforcement agents
to polling places.
They were prepared to
deploy active and reserve
military forces in case
of a massive incident.
And they also prepared for
counterpropaganda efforts in the
wake of the vote, should false
information be spread to try
and undermine its credibility.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what had they
seen that caused them to go to
this length before election?
MASSIMO CALABRESI: So,
initially, they saw
one or two states back
in the summer where
the Russians had broken
into the voter registration
rolls and meddled around.
But the more they looked,
the more they found other
states had been compromised.
And they didn't quite know
what the Russians were doing.
Initially, they thought they
might be able to swing the
vote, but they soon concluded
that actual meddling with
the vote count wasn't
going to be possible.
But they decided that what
the Russians could do was take
certain actions that would call
into question whether it
had been free and fair, like
interfering with the reporting
systems on election
night, meddling with
voter rolls throughout
the country in ways that
would cause long lines
or, in swing states, might
cause an extraordinary
number of provisional
ballots to be cast.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Excuse me,
but there were instances
where -- you have
reported, because you have
written a number of
stories about this, were in
California, for example.
There was an instance where a
number of people reported they
had trouble voting because of
how their identity had been
changed in voter registration.
MASSIMO CALABRESI:
That's absolutely right.
On primary day in California
in June 2016, the local DA
started getting a bench of calls
from voters saying that they
were not being allowed to vote
because their voter registration
information had been changed
in the statewide voter
registration database.
The hackers remain unknown in
that case because the state of
California doesn't record the
I.P. addresses of computers
that make changes.
But, looking back, the federal
officials who were in charge
of defending the vote, in the
context of the other Russian
intrusions, concluded
that this might have
been a test run by the
Russians to show what kind
of disruption they could
cause on Election Day.
And indeed, in this county
in California, the voters
became quite agitated, and the
mystery actually fed the doubt.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I want
to press you on this, because
you're saying that the Russians
were not able -- they weren't
worried that the Russians were
going to be able to change
the final vote count.
MASSIMO CALABRESI: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But were able
to get in, in a remarkable
way, into state voter files,
into election systems.
MASSIMO CALABRESI: And this is
what's so important, because the
Russians had over time become
bolder and bolder about their
intrusions, and had not tried
to hide the fact that they
were breaking into systems.
The Russians are very
skilled cyber-actors, among
the best in the world.
So the fact they were remaining
in the open was a clue to the
larger purpose of the operation.
And it's crucial to
keep this in mind.
The first and primary goal of
the Russian operation against
the election was to undermine
American faith in the
democratic process, the
first and abiding goal.
Every secondary goal that came
had to first fulfill undermining
our faith in the democratic
process.
And so what the cyber-security
officials at the White House
and across government at the
FBI and intelligence community
concluded was that these
intrusions were less about the
specific effect that they
could have than they were on
undermining the faith of the
Americans in
elections generally.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it appears
that they succeeded, at
least in part, in doing that.
And you report that there is
every reason to think that
they may still be engaged in
this.
We have an election, governors
election coming up, this year.
MASSIMO CALABRESI: That's right.
That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All
of our congressional
elections next year.
MASSIMO CALABRESI: That's right.
That's right.
The crucial thing here is,
this is an attack by Russia on
America, not on a particular
candidate or on a
particular party.
Their interests are in weakening
the U.S. at home and abroad.
And that's why it's so important
now that we take steps to
try and secure our election,
so that this kind of exercise,
propaganda, influence operation
designed to undermine
our faith in the democratic
process here can't
succeed in the future.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And how high
up in the Russian government
does the direction of this go?
We know that at one point
President Obama was reportedly
telling Vladimir Putin, cut
it out.
MASSIMO CALABRESI:
Well, that's right.
Obama famously confronted him
in that photograph of the two
staring at each other icily in
China at a meeting and
told him to cut it out.
The intelligence community
reported publicly in
their assessment in
January that the operation
had been approved at
the highest level.
And my sources tell
me that means Putin.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it doesn't
get any higher than that.
MASSIMO CALABRESI: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
it's a remarkable
collection of stories.
Congratulations on
all this reporting.
And I know you're
continuing to work on it.
MASSIMO CALABRESI: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Massimo Calabresi
with "TIME," thank you.
MASSIMO CALABRESI:
Thanks for having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: the
fears around the development
of artificial intelligence.
Computer superintelligence is
a long, long way from the stuff
of sci-fi movies, but several
high-profile leaders
and thinkers have been
worrying quite publicly
about what they see
as the risks to come.
Our economics correspondent,
Paul Solman, explores that.
It's part of his weekly
series, Making Sense.
ACTOR: I want to talk to you
about the greatest scientific
event in the history of man.
ACTOR: Are you building an A.I.?
PAUL SOLMAN: A.I.,
artificial intelligence.
ACTRESS: Do you think I
might be switched off?
ACTOR: It's not up to me.
ACTRESS: Why is it up to anyone?
PAUL SOLMAN: Some version of
this scenario has had prominent
tech luminaries and scientists
worried for years.
In 2014, cosmologist Stephen
Hawking told the BBC:
STEPHEN HAWKING, Scientist
(through computer voice):
I think the development
of full artificial
intelligence could spell
the end of the human race.
PAUL SOLMAN: And just this
week, Tesla and SpaceX
entrepreneur Elon Musk
told the MDNMational
Governors Association:
ELON MUSK, CEO, Tesla
Motors: A.I. is a
fundamental existential
risk for human civilization.
And I don't think people
fully appreciate that.
PAUL SOLMAN: OK, but
what's the economics angle?
Well, at Oxford University's
Future of Humanity Institute,
founding director Nick Bostrom
leads a team trying to figure
out how best to invest in,
well, the future of humanity.
NICK BOSTROM, Oxford University:
We are in this very peculiar
situation of looking back
at the history of our species,
100,000 years old, and now
finding ourselves just before
the threshold to what looks
like it will be this transition
to some post-human era of
superintelligence that
can colonize the universe,
and then maybe last
for billions of years.
PAUL SOLMAN: Philosopher Bostrom
has been perhaps the most
prominent thinker about the
benefits and dangers
to humanity of what he
calls superintelligence
for many years.
NICK BOSTROM: Once there is
superintelligence, the fate of
humanity may depend on what that
superintelligence does.
PAUL SOLMAN: There are
plenty of ways to invest in
humanity, he says, giving
money to anti-disease
charities, for example.
But Bostrom thinks
longer-term, about investing
to lessen existential
risks, those that threaten
to wipe out the human
species entirely.
Global warming might be one.
But plenty of other people are
worrying about that, he says.
So, he thinks about other risks.
What are the greatest
of those risks?
NICK BOSTROM: The
greatest existential
risks arise from certain
anticipated technological
breakthroughs that we
might make, in particular,
machine superintelligence,
nanotechnology,
and synthetic biology,
fundamentally because we
don't have the ability
to uninvent anything
that we invent.
We don't, as a human
civilization, have the
ability to put the genie
back into the bottle.
Once something has been
published, then we are
stuck with that knowledge.
PAUL SOLMAN: So Bostrom
wants money invested
in how to manage A.I.
NICK BOSTROM: Specifically
on the question, if and when
in the future you could build
machines that were really
smart, maybe superintelligent,
smarter than humans, how
could you then ensure
that you could control what
those machines do, that they
were beneficial, that they were
aligned with human intentions?
PAUL SOLMAN: How likely is it
that machines would develop
basically a mind of their own,
which is what you're
saying, right?
NICK BOSTROM: I do think
that advanced A.I., including
superintelligence, is a sort of
portal through which
humanity will have passage,
assuming we don't destroy
ourselves prematurely
in some other way.
Right now, the human
brain is where it's at.
It's the source of almost all
of the technologies we have.
PAUL SOLMAN: I'm
relieved to hear that.
(LAUGHTER)
NICK BOSTROM: And the complex
social organization we have.
PAUL SOLMAN: Right.
NICK BOSTROM: It's why
the modern condition is
so different from the
way that the chimpanzees
live.
It's all through the
human brain's ability to
discover and communicate.
But there is no reason to
think that human intelligence
is anywhere near the greatest
possible level of intelligence
that could exist, that we are
sort of the smartest possible
species.
I think, rather, that we are
the stupidest possible species
that is capable of creating
technological civilization.
PAUL SOLMAN: And capable of
creating technology that has
begun to surpass us, first
in chess, then in "Jeopardy,"
now in the supposedly impossible
game for a machine to win, Go.
This is just task-oriented
software, some have argued,
and not really intelligence at
all.
Moreover, whatever you call
it, there will be enormous
benefits, says Bostrom.
On the other hand, if we
approach real intelligence,
it could also become a threat.
Think of "Ex Machina" or "The
Matrix" or Elon Musk's fantasy
fear this week about advanced
A.I.
ELON MUSK: Well, it could start
a war by create - - by doing
fake news and spoofing e-mail
accounts and fake press
releases, and just by, you
know, manipulating information.
The pen is mightier
than the sword.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, this is going
to be a cat-and-mouse game
between us and the intelligence?
NICK BOSTROM: That
would be one model.
One line of attack is to try to
leverage the A.I.'s intelligence
to learn what it is that
we value and what
we want it to do.
PAUL SOLMAN: In order to protect
ourselves from what could
be a truly existential risk.
So, how do you get the greatest
good for the greatest number
of present and future humans
beings?
It might be to invest now
in controlling the evolution
of artificial intelligence.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this
is economics correspondent
Paul Solman, reporting from
Oxford, England.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now we turn
to the grinding civil war in
Yemen, which has also become
a proxy conflict
between neighboring
Saudi Arabia and Iran.
A two-and-a-half-year bombing
campaign has killed thousands.
Vast swathes of the
country lie devastated.
Compounding the horror, Yemen
is on the brink of famine.
There are critical shortages
of aid and medical care,
and now an outbreak of
cholera is spreading.
The country has been essentially
closed to journalists for
months, but filmmaker Martin
Smith and his team from
"Frontline" were able to
gain access to Yemen in May.
"Frontline" has a short
film on its Web site
documenting what they saw.
Here is an excerpt, beginning
in the capital, Sanaa.
MARTIN SMITH: It's not just
the jets you hear overhead, or
the buildings that are bombed,
or the airport
that's demolished.
It's the knock-on effects of
the war on infrastructure.
When we came into town,
what struck me right
away was the amount of
garbage on the streets.
The garbage workers hadn't
been paid in eight months.
The rains came, washing through
the garbage, bacteria carried
into the water supply, people
drinking bad water.
And they were hit by
a cholera epidemic.
Cholera simply dehydrates you
quickly, so that anything you
ingest, any water you drink
or food you eat just completely
passes through your system,
and you get no nutrients out
of it.
WOMAN: She is very tired
because of the exhaustion
from the electrolyte
imbalance that she has.
She can't control herself now
until she gets enough fluid.
MARTIN SMITH: The World Health
Organization is saying that
there are over 300,000 cases
of cholera; 1,600 people have
died, many of them children.
And the numbers keep going up.
The hospital we visited, they
were already beyond capacity.
The nurses and doctors were
suffering from a lack of
medicines and equipment.
And they were there working,
in spite the fact that
they hadn't been paid.
WOMAN: We don't get salary.
Last salary I got was
in September only.
If I will not work,
then they will die.
And maybe tomorrow, I will
be sick, and nobody will
see me because of no salary.
MARTIN SMITH: People
often ask why the Saudis
are bombing Yemen.
It's a question for the Saudis.
They will tell you they're
fighting against the rebel
group that's trying to take over
the country, who are backed
by their archrival, Iran.
Yet, in the time I was there,
it was hard to see really
what the Iranians were doing.
But the impact of the
Saudi-led coalition
bombing was very clear.
Parts of the country
have been isolated of
bomb strikes on bridges.
People on the ground
in Yemen are suffering.
They're caught in the
crossfire of this war.
In Hajjah, we went
to a hospital.
And I met a nurse there who
showed me pictures she'd taken
a day or two before of a young
boy who came in severely
malnourished, and died.
WOMAN (through translator):
Of course one gets very upset.
All of us here do.
We do our job, and
we love the child.
And, in the end, they pass away.
It's hard.
MARTIN SMITH: She then was
called away to go take care
of a new severe malnutrition
patient.
A mother came in with her child.
It was a little girl named
Aline, a seventh-month-old baby.
WOMAN (through translator):
For sure, it's a
consequence of the war.
The war is behind
the malnourishment.
And it is only getting worse.
The cases have increased.
There is a food shortage.
How are your living
conditions at home?
WOMAN (through
translator): Terrible.
MARTIN SMITH: There were always
malnutrition cases in Yemen,
but the nurse told us that
the number of cases had more
than doubled since the war.
And maybe an hour later,
another mother came
in with her daughter.
Ruqayah her name.
It was a 5-year-old girl.
Ruqayah had come from
an IDP, an internally
displaced persons camp.
And it's quite a ways away up
near the Saudi border, traveled
several hours, because the
hospital up near
her had been bombed.
WOMAN (through translator): As
a result of these catastrophes,
they don't have the means
to travel from their
areas, which are usually
very far from ours.
So they wait.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That was an
excerpt of "Inside Yemen," a
"Frontline" short film by Martin
Smith.
For more on the conflict and
the people caught in between,
we're joined from New York by
David Miliband.
He is president and CEO of the
International Rescue Committee,
a global aid agency, and
he served as foreign
secretary of the United
Kingdom from 2007 to 2010.
David Miliband, welcome
back to the "NewsHour."
That was a horrific film we
have just seen an excerpt of.
Tell us more about just how bad
things are right now in Yemen.
DAVID MILIBAND, President,
International Rescue
Committee: Well, I think
horrific is the right
word for the tragedy
that's unfolding in Yemen.
It is the modern face of
humanitarian catastrophe,
because Yemen represents
a political emergency,
as well as a
humanitarian emergency.
Yemen is one of four
countries threatened by
famine at the moment.
And the numbers in Yemen
are absolutely staggering,
20 million people in
humanitarian need, over
300,000 diagnosed
with cholera already.
And our teams on the
ground -- the International
Rescue Committee has
150 or 200 staff on the
ground in Yemen -- and what
they report is direct danger
to civilians from bombing as
part of the war that's going
on, and indirect danger from
the consequences of war that are
impeding access to --
of humanitarian workers
and have destroyed about
half of the hospitals
in the country.
So it really is complete
meltdown in Yemen at the moment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, if I were
to ask you what are people --
what are the main needs that
people have, it sounds as
if you're saying everything.
DAVID MILIBAND: Yes, it is
everything, but I think one
can be specific, first of all,
that the war needs to be
conducted within the confines
of international humanitarian
law.
International humanitarian law,
which defends civilians from
attack, needs to be observed.
Secondly, the bombing
of hospitals needs to
be arrested and stopped.
Thirdly, access for humanitarian
aide workers needs to be
supported, rather than impeded.
There's a threat to
the main port in Yemen,
the Hodeidah port.
There's a threat
to bomb that port.
In fact, it needs stronger
U.N. presence there to
ensure that food is able
to enter the country,
because, obviously, the
agriculture has been completely
ruined over the last few years
of war.
And, fourthly, and critically,
there needs to be support
from the whole international
diplomatic and political,
as well as humanitarian
community for some kind
of political settlement
that can put ahold
to the fighting.
Nearly two years ago at the
United Nations, I attended a
meeting of foreign nations of
Gulf countries who said
they were committed
to finding a political
settlement, but, frankly,
it's no nearer now
than it was then.
And civilians in Yemen
are paying the price.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why has
it gotten to this point?
You describe a situation that,
by stages, has gotten to a
point, as you're describing,
it's going to be very difficult
to put this back together again.
DAVID MILIBAND: You're
absolutely right.
I mean, there are two
main reasons, I think.
First of all, the war itself
has seen a significant
upping of the ante, first
of all, by the Saudi-led
coalition, the U.S. supporting
that, then the Iranians getting
involved, then retaliation
against the Iranian involvement.
And so you see an escalation
upon escalation, neither side
willing to compromise, for fear
of losing face.
The second thing that's
been happening is
that the humanitarian
tragedy and the failure
to protect civilians and deliver
humanitarian aid has, I'm
afraid, fueled the political
emergency.
It's provided fuel
for radicalism.
It's entrenched both sides.
The bloodletting has meant that
both the Houthi rebels and the
government who have the support
of the Saudis and the
American side have got
further and further apart.
A million refugees have
left the country, including
some fleeing to Somalia.
You have got a situation
where Somalia is safer
for them than Yemen.
And those are the
two main reasons.
There is one other
thing, just to further
enlighten your audience.
Yemen is a country that
is suffering terribly
from climate change.
Sanaa is predicted to be the
first capital city in the
world to run out of water.
So you have got chronic
long-term problems and
acute problems in the
short term as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A number of
guilty parties you're talking
about, including the United
States.
What, politically, can be done?
I mean, you said a moment ago,
David Miliband, this is even
more a political crisis than
a humanitarian, as bad as it
is on a humanitarian level.
What has to be done?
DAVID MILIBAND: I think the
diplomatic and political muscle
needs to be applied to ensure
that there is a cease-fire, that
that then is built on with a
proper negotiated settlement,
because the truth is that the
current trajectory of the war
is in the interests of neither
side.
No one is winning.
But the civilians of Yemen
are losing very big time.
I'm pleased to say that
there are some senators
speaking up on this.
I was in Washington on Monday.
And there is growing concern,
I think, in the Senate to call
on the U.S. administration
to persuade the Saudis to call
a halt to this bombing campaign,
which, as I say, is fueling
the insurgency, rather than
curbing it, and to give time
for humanitarian aid to get in.
I mean, it tells you something
that we in the humanitarian
sector are desperately calling
on there to be no bombing of
the main port through which
90 percent of the food gets
into Yemen.
And Yemen is one of
four countries that are
threatened by famine.
And a unique coalition of
eight American-led NGOs
have come together to
form a global emergency
response coalition to call
on the American public to
support us in trying to staunch
the bloodshed, to staunch
the humanitarian suffering,
even while the war going on.
But it's for the diplomats
and the politicians to try
and bring the war to an end.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What's at
stake if that doesn't happen?
DAVID MILIBAND: Suffering and
further fuel for the insurgency.
This is a downward spiral
to hell that really
needs to be arrested.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Miliband
of the International Rescue
Committee, thank you very much.
DAVID MILIBAND:
Thank you very much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to another
in our Brief But Spectacular
series, where we ask people
to describe their passions.
Tonight, we hear from Academy
Award-winning documentary
filmmaker Laura Poitras.
Her latest film is "Risk,"
which looks at WikiLeaks
and Julian Assange.
LAURA POITRAS, Documentary
Filmmaker: It's a bit surprising
that I do documentaries,
because I consider myself
to be a really shy person.
And there's something about
the documentary form that I
guess it sort of -- it kind of
gives you an invitation, maybe,
to go places you wouldn't go
otherwise or to take risks
you wouldn't take otherwise.
My filmmaking is -- kind
of comes in a tradition
of observational cinema
or cinema verite.
Legendary founders of it
is D.A. Pennebaker, Albert
Maysles, Frederick Wiseman.
They capture human stories.
They capture drama, and they
capture history as it unfolds.
When you talk to people and
who they tell you who they are
is oftentimes different than
their actions.
And so I'm interested in
people's actions and choices.
So, for instance, sitting in a
hotel room with Edward Snowden,
as he's making this monumental
decision to leak this
information, is an example
of the type of cinema
that I'm interested
in doing.
The last two films I have
done, "Citizenfour" and
"Risk," I became a participant.
There were things that were
happening that were happening
because of work that I was
doing, reporting on the NSA.
I mean, if you expose the
deepest levels of intelligence
agencies, they do tend to pay
attention to what you're doing.
I was placed on a government
terrorist watch list in 2006,
and was detained at the U.S.
border for -- probably
50 times, interrogated.
I have had computers
confiscated.
I have had notebooks
photocopied.
They have subpoenaed my records.
They would send FBI agents
to my film screenings to
see what I said in Q&As.
MAN: There's a filmmaker
named Laura Poitras.
Laura Poitras is known through
the defense community as a
documentary filmmaker who is
anti-U.S.
LAURA POITRAS: I became really
interested in WikiLeaks and
Julian Assange in 2010, like
a lot of people, first when
they published the video of
Collateral Murder, the Apache
helicopter footage
that showed killings of
Iraqis, by U.S. military.
And having made a film about
the war in Iraq, I knew that
this was the kind of thing that
was happening every day there.
I reached out to WikiLeaks and
Assange during that time and
then started filming in 2011.
And I was interested in how
they were changing journalism.
I had somewhat of a falling out
with him over the film, where
he wanted me not to use scenes
in the film.
One of the scenes that Julian
wanted removed from the film
is the scene where his lawyers
are giving him advice about
how to speak publicly of
-- around these allegations
of sexual assault.
JULIAN ASSANGE, Founder,
WikiLeaks: It's just a
thoroughly tawdry, radical,
feminist, political
positioning thing.
It's some stereotype.
LAURA POITRAS: I still have
enormous respect for, like, the
project of WikiLeaks and its
importance, because I
think they have done
extraordinary publishing.
I'm always interested in access.
Like -- you know, like, I would
love to have access to Robert
Mueller's investigation into
Donald Trump, or James Comey.
But I think those are
going to be pretty tough
to get access to that.
But, yes, I'm really looking
forward to like the really good
documentary that's capturing
what's happening right
now in our politics.
I hope it's being
documented by someone.
My name is Laura Poitras,
and this is my brief take
on documentary filmmaking.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can
watch additional Brief But
Spectacular episodes at
PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
On the "NewsHour" online
right now: As we reported this
week, teenagers from all over
the world, including
an all-girls team from
Afghanistan, were in
Washington to participate
in a robotics competition.
On Wednesday, a six-person
team from the war-torn African
nation of Burundi went missing.
But now two of those
teens have been found
safe crossing into Canada.
You can read more
on our Web site.
It's PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again
right here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.